There are several different strategies for API versioning.
We're going to look at five common approaches, URI, media type,
custom header, request parameter, and no strategy.
URI versioning is popular because it is simple to implement. Somewhere in
the URI, usually near the root, a version indicator is placed, such as v1
or v2, then the rest of the URI follows.
For example,
globomantics.com/api/v1/products would be version 1 of the API, while
globomantics.com/api/v2/products would be version 2 of the API.
When caching uses the URI as a key, this helps invalidate cache when
switching API versions so that the cached content matches what a
particular version of the API is returning.
One disadvantage of this method is that an entire new subtree
is created with each version of the API,
which will require testing and validation.
Another disadvantage could be that the URI itself is changing.
Normally, media type would be something like application/json.
When using media type as a versioning scheme, you would define vendor‑specific
media types that would then be read on the server side to determine which
version of the API to use for that particular call.
For example,
application/vnd.globomantics.v1+json where v1 indicates that version 1
of the API should be used to process that call, or
application/vnd.globomantics.v2+json where v2 indicates that version 2
of the API should be used to process the call.
Some people like this versioning strategy because the URI does not change.
Others find it confusing since nonstandard media types are being used as values.
Using a custom header is similar to using media type, but
instead of overloading an existing header,
you define a new custom header for the client to use to communicate
version information to the server. For example,
you could define the header, accept‑version, and require it to have
a defined value like v1 or v2. For each request, the server would
need to look for the header and value to determine which version of
the API to use for that call.
With this strategy, the URI does not change,
and some people feel that a custom header is more clear
than using an overloaded media type.
Request parameters are another option to use for API versioning.
You can define a parameter to append with version information, then
that parameter would need to be parsed by the server to determine
which version of the API to use for that call.
For example,
globomantics.com/api/products?version=v1 uses a parameter named
version with a value v1 to indicate that the request should be
handled by version 1 of the API.
To use version 2 of the API, the parameter value would simply
be changed from v1 to v2. In this strategy,
the main URI does not change, only parameter values.
Some people dislike this strategy because it can make routing requests
more difficult than other versioning strategies.
Another option you can consider is no versioning at all.
Just don't worry about adding a version because you may never need it.
You can start out with a clean URI, no v1 that may never change,
your server‑side logic is going to be simpler,
and your clients won't need to know any special header
values or options that need to be passed in with each call,
so using the API is easier as well.
If the time comes that you do need to make a major change,
you may need a rewrite, which wouldn't use versioning anyway, or,
if you just need a new version,
go ahead and add it with whatever versioning strategy you wish and
the existing non‑versioned API can simply become the default if no
version information is specified.
Out of all the versioning strategies we discussed, and a few that we
didn't, the most popular tend to be URI and custom header.
A big appeal for URI is the simplicity of developing and testing
different versions by simply changing the URI.
This can be done in a browser without any special tools or code.
Custom header is a good solution for people who want to keep a
single URI and are comfortable managing additional headers on both
the client side and server side.
Whether you agree or disagree in principle with these two strategies,
there is some value in being on the main highway of implementation options.
Generally,
you're going to have more people recognize and understand what you are
producing, and you're going to have more resources available to help you do it.
In the next two modules, we're going to take a closer look at how to implement
these two strategies in a Spring Data REST API.
So far, we've discussed how versioning can help consumers of your API manage
breaking changes and several different versioning strategies,
along with some advantages and disadvantages of those strategies.
We also identified two of the most popular strategies, URI and custom header. Join me in the next module where we will dive into implementing URI versioning.